Move to time based releases and update LTS (#7)
dmcgowan/containerd: RELEASES.md

`release/1.0` will be created from that tag. All future patch releases will be
done against that branch.

### Release Cadence

> Minor releases are time based with an initial cadence of 6 months. The next two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Minor releases are provided on a time basis with an initial cadence of 6 months. The next two
```

> containerd releases should have a target release date scheduled and any change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
containerd releases should have a target release date scheduled based on this release cadence. Any changes
```

> to the cadence will be considered after a new release but without impacting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the release cadence will avoid impacting
```

by the release branch owners.

### Pre-releases

Pre-releases, such as alphas, betas and release candidates will be conducted
from their source branch. For major and minor releases, these releases will be
done from main. For patch releases, it is uncommon to have pre-releases but
they may have an rc based on the discretion of the release branch owners.

### Support Horizon

Support horizons will be defined corresponding to a release branch, identified
by `<major>.<minor>`. Release branches will be in one of several states:

- __*Future*__: An upcoming scheduled release.
- __*Alpha*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under active development.
- __*Beta*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under testing. Begins 8-10 weeks before a final release.
- __*RC*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under final testing and stabilization. Begins 2-4 weeks before a final release. For new releases where the source branch is main, the main branch will be in a feature freeze during this phase.
- __*Active*__: The release is a stable branch which is currently supported and accepting patches.

> - __*Extended*__: The release branch is only accepting security patches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Extended*__: The release branch is only accepting security patches any other critical updates would require formal exception approval at the discretion of the committers.
```

Author: Updated to say "and critical updates", up the discretion of the owners has to always be applied I think. Applying something "critical" shouldn't have be an exception, only defining what is "critical"

`release/1.0` will be created from that tag. All future patch releases will be
done against that branch.

### Release Cadence

> Minor releases are time based with a target cadence of 6 months. The next two

Reviewer 2: Maybe this cadence should be marked tentative until 2026.
We have to have a couple of releases to evaluate whether this plan is feasible in practice

Author: I updated from "target cadence" to "initial cadence". I think the following sentence makes it clear that the cadence is open to change, let me know if that is not clear though

> Major and minor releases are time based with a target cadence of 6 months. The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Minor releases are time based with a target cadence of 6 months. The
```

I don't think we want to promise major releases here.  We could also say something akin to "the next release *may* be a major release following the same cadence.

containerd releases should have a target release date scheduled and any change
to the cadence will be considered after a new release but without impacting
releases which are already scheduled.

The maintainers will maintain a roadmap and milestones for each release, however,
features may be pushed to accomodate the release timeline. If your issue or feature

> is not present in the roadmap, please reach out to the maintainers or leave a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is not present in the roadmap, please open a GitHub issue
```

comment requesting it be added to a milestone.

### Patch Releases

Patch releases are made directly from release branches and will be done as needed
by the release branch owners.

### Pre-releases

Pre-releases, such as alphas, betas and release candidates will be conducted
from their source branch. For major and minor releases, these releases will be
done from main. For patch releases, it is uncommon to have pre-releases but
they may have an rc based on the discretion of the release branch owners.

While pre-releases are done to assist in the stabilization process, no quality

> guarantees are provided.

Reviewer 2: Maybe remove this sentence, as no "guarantee" is provided for any release

### Support Horizon

Support horizons will be defined corresponding to a release branch, identified
by `<major>.<minor>`. Release branches will be in one of several states:

- __*Future*__: An upcoming scheduled release.
- __*Alpha*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under active development.
- __*Beta*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under testing. Begins 8-10 weeks before a final release.

> - __*RC*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under final testing and stabilization. Begins 2-4 weeks before a final release. During this phase the main branch is in a feature freeze.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __*RC*__: The next scheduled release on the main branch under final testing and stabilization. Begins 2-4 weeks before a final release. For new releases where the source branch is main, the main branch will be in a feature freeze during this phase.
```

`release/1.0` will be created from that tag. All future patch releases will be
done against that branch.

### Release Cadence

Minor releases are provided on a time basis with an initial cadence of 6 months.
The next two containerd releases should have a target release date scheduled based
on the current release cadence. Any changes to the release cadence will avoid

> impacting releases which are already scheduled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on the current release cadence. Changes to the release cadence will not
impact releases which are already scheduled.
```

timeframe will be decided by maintainers before the end of the active status.

Long term stable (_LTS_) releases are owned by at least two maintainers for at least two
years after their initial _minor_ (x.y.0) release. The maintainers of the _LTS_ branch may commit to
a longer period or extend the support period as needed. These branches will accept bug reports and
backports until the end of life date. They may also accept a wider range of patches than non-_LTS_
releases to support the longer term maintainability of the branch, including library dependency,
toolchain (including Go) and other version updates which are needed to ensure each release is built
with fully supported dependencies. Feature backports are up to the discretion of the maintainers who
own the branch but should be rejected by default. There is no defined limit to the number of _LTS_
branches and any branch may become an _LTS_ branch after its initial release. There is no guarantee
that a new _LTS_ branch will be designated before existing _LTS_ branches reach their end of life.

### Release Owners

Every release shall be assigned owners when entering into the beta stage of the release. The initial

> release owners will act as the release captains and will be responsible for creating the releases and

Reviewer 3: We should either define or omit the term "release captains".  I think it's clear enough without including that; the owners are responsible for doing these things.

ensuring the release is on time. Once the release is in rc, the release owners should be part of any
discussion around merging impactful or risky changes. Every release should have two owners who

> are both active maintainers and one of which has been involved in at least two prior releases.

Reviewer 3: What are the "involved in" requirements?  Does that just mean "a maintainer during the Active state of that release" or acting in some other capacity?

Author: I'll update to has been a release owner to make it more explicit. The idea is that it would allow non-committers to be involved with releases. We can leave it up to us how we would define release owners for prior releases, but I plan to be involved in the next two scheduled releases to help transition the process anyway. I can update to "at least" two if that will help train more folks if necessary.

period after the end of the active period to accept security backports. This
timeframe will be decided by maintainers before the end of the active status.

> Long term stable (_LTS_) releases are sponsored by at least two maintainers for at least two

Reviewer 4: Do we need a file to track who the sponsor of the LTS is?

Author: This file should be the source of truth

years after their initial _minor_ (x.y.0) release. The maintainers of the _LTS_ branch may commit to
a longer period or extend the support period as needed. These branches will accept bug reports and
backports until the end of life date. They may also accept a wider range of patches than non-_LTS_
releases to support the longer term maintainability of the branch, including library dependency,
toolchain (including Go) and other version updates which are needed to ensure each release is built
with fully supported dependencies. Feature backports are up to the discretion of the maintainers who
own the branch but should be rejected by default. There is no defined limit to the number of _LTS_
branches and any branch may become an _LTS_ branch after its initial release. There is no guarantee
that a new _LTS_ branch will be designated before existing _LTS_ branches reach their end of life.

### Release Owners

> Every release shall be assigned ownership once it reaches beta. The initial release owners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every release shall be assigned ownership maintainers on entry into the beta stage of the release. The initial release owners
```

will act as the release captains and will be responsible for creating the releases and ensuring
the release is on time. Once the release is in rc, the release owners should be part of any
discussion around merging impactful or risky changes. Every release should have two owners who
are both active maintainers and one of which has been involved in two prior releases.

Once the final release is out and the release branch moves to active, ownership will be
transferred back over to all committers. Active releases are maintained by all committers

> until the release reaches end of life or the branch transitions to _LTS_ with at least

Reviewer: ```suggestion
until the release reaches end of life or the branch transitions to _LTS_. Every _LTS_ release shall be assigned at least
```

> two maintainers keeping ownership.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two ownership maintainers.
```

The owners of the _LTS_ branch may step down or be replaced by another maintainer at any time if
they can no longer support the branch. If no maintainers volunteer to the own a branch after
maintainers step down, the branch will end of life after 6 months of extended support with
ownership transferred back to all committers.

> ### All Releases

Reviewer 4: maybe we should add column for LTS's sponsor?

Author: Thats what the owners field is intended for

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current state of our containerd releases:

```

period after the end of the active period to accept security backports. This
timeframe will be decided by maintainers before the end of the active status.

Long term stable (_LTS_) releases are sponsored by at least two maintainers for at least two
years after their initial _minor_ release. The maintainers of the _LTS_ branch may commit to a
longer period or extend the support period as needed. These branches will accept bug reports and
backports until the end of life date. They may also accept a wider range of patches than non-_LTS_
releases to support the longer term maintainability of the branch, including library dependency,
toolchain (including Go) and other version updates which are needed to ensure each release is built
with fully supported dependencies. Feature backports are up to the discretion of the maintainers who
own the branch but should be rejected by default. There is no limit to the number of _LTS_ branches

> and any branch may become an _LTS_ branch after its initial release. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and any branch may become an _LTS_ branch after its initial release. 
There is no guarantee that a new _LTS_ branch will be designated before existing _LTS_ branches reach their end of support.
```

period after the end of the active period to accept security backports. This
timeframe will be decided by maintainers before the end of the active status.

Long term stable (_LTS_) releases are sponsored by at least two maintainers for at least two

> years after their initial _minor_ release. The maintainers of the _LTS_ branch may commit to a

Reviewer 2: "initial minor release" is .0 or .1?

Author: Updated to mention `x.y.0`

longer period or extend the support period as needed. These branches will accept bug reports and
backports until the end of life date. They may also accept a wider range of patches than non-_LTS_
releases to support the longer term maintainability of the branch, including library dependency,
toolchain (including Go) and other version updates which are needed to ensure each release is built
with fully supported dependencies. Feature backports are up to the discretion of the maintainers who

> own the branch but should be rejected by default. There is no limit to the number of _LTS_ branches

Reviewer 2: Probably a soft-limit can be set.
It doesn't sound realistic to keep maintaining more than 3 LTS branches

Author: Updated to say "no defined limit", we can define a limit if needed in the future

and any branch may become an _LTS_ branch after its initial release. There is no guarantee that a
new _LTS_ branch will be designated before existing _LTS_ branches reach their end of life.

### Release Owners

Every release shall be assigned ownership once it reaches beta. The initial release owners
will act as the release captains and will be responsible for creating the releases and ensuring
the release is on time. Once the release is in rc, the release owners should be part of any
discussion around merging impactful or risky changes. Every release should have two owners who
are both active maintainers and one of which has been involved in two prior releases.

Once the final release is out and the release branch moves to active, ownership will be

> transferred back over to all maintainers. Active releases are maintained by all maintainers

Reviewer 2: s/maintainers/Committers/g

| [0.2](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/v0.2.x)          | End of Life   | Apr 21, 2016       | December 5, 2017   |                        |
| [1.0](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.0.3)  | End of Life   | December 5, 2017   | December 5, 2018   |                        |
| [1.1](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.1.8)  | End of Life   | April 23, 2018     | October 23, 2019   |                        |
| [1.2](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.2.13) | End of Life   | October 24, 2018   | October 15, 2020   |                        |
| [1.3](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.3.10) | End of Life   | September 26, 2019 | March 4, 2021      |                        |
| [1.4](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.4.13) | End of Life   | August 17, 2020    | March 3, 2022      |                        |
| [1.5](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.5.18) | End of Life   | May 3, 2021        | February 28, 2023  |                        |

> | [1.6](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v1.6.36) | LTS           | February 15, 2022  | July 17, 2025      | @containerd/committers |

Reviewer 2: The EOL criteria should not be changed for the existing releases

Only when the bug is not seen in main and must be made for the specific
release branch should you open a PR with new code.

### Upgrade Path

The upgrade path for containerd is such that the 0.0.x patch releases are
always backward compatible with its major and minor version. Minor (0.x.0)
version will always be compatible with the previous minor release. i.e. 1.2.0
is backwards compatible with 1.1.0 and 1.1.0 is compatible with 1.0.0. There is
no compatibility guarantees for upgrades that span multiple, _minor_ releases.
For example, 1.0.0 to 1.2.0 is not supported. One should first upgrade to 1.1,
then 1.2.

> There are no compatibility guarantees with upgrades to _major_ versions. For

Reviewer 3: This should probably be updated to discuss the upgrade path from 1.7.x to 2.0.x.

We don't need to make it a part of this change, but we also need to cover LTS upgrades; i.e., can you upgrade directly from one LTS to the next?

Author: Yeah, we should revisit this section
